Building Android Splash Screen (#1)
mohit-sharma-87/DevHub-Articles: Building Splash Screen Android.md

> # Building Splash Screen natively, Android 12, Kotlin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Building Splash Screen Natively, Android 12, Kotlin
```

> > In this article we would explore & learn how to build a Splash screen with SplashScreen API which was introduced in Android 12.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In this article, we will explore and learn how to build a splash screen with SplashScreen API, which was introduced in Android 12.
```

<br>

> A quick recap of a few basic stuff, feel free to skip it.

Reviewer: I'd delete this.

> ## What is Splash Screen?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is a Splash Screen?
```

It is the first view that is shown to a user as soon as you tap on the app icon. If you notice a blank white screen (for a
short moment) after tapping on your favourite app, it means it doesn't have a splash screen.

> ## Why/When I do need it?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why/When Do I Need It?
```

> Often Splash screen is seen as a differentiator between normal and professional apps. Some use cases where the splash screen fit perfectly are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often, the splash screen is seen as a differentiator between normal and professional apps. Some use cases where a splash screen fits perfectly are:
```

* When we want to download data before users start using the app.

> * If we want to promote app branding and want to display your logo for a longer period of time Or just for a more immersive experience that takes you from the moment you tap on the icon smoothly in whatever the app has to offer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If we want to promote app branding and display your logo for a longer period of time, or just have a more immersive experience that smoothly takes you from the moment you tap on the icon to whatever the app has to offer.
```

> Till now creating a splash screen was never straightforward and always some amount of boilerplate code added to the application like creating SplashActivity with no view, adding a timer for branding promotion purposes etc. With SplashScreen API all of this is set to go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until now, creating a splash screen was never straightforward and always required some amount of boilerplate code added to the application, like creating SplashActivity with no view, adding a timer for branding promotion purposes, etc. With SplashScreen API, all of this is set to go.
```

> ## Show me the code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Show Me the Code
```

### Step 1: Creating a Theme

> Even for the new `SplashScreen` API, we need to create a theme but in `value-v31` folder as few parameters are supported only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even for the new `SplashScreen` API, we need to create a theme but in the `value-v31` folder as a few parameters are supported only
```

> in <b>Android 12</b>. Therefore, create a folder in named `value-v31` under `res` folder and add `theme.xml` to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in <b>Android 12</b>. Therefore, create a folder named `value-v31` under `res` folder and add `theme.xml` to it.
```

And before that, let’s break our splash screen into pieces for simplification.

![Splash Screen placeholder](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/12/images/splash-screen-composition.png)

* Point 1 represents the icon of the screen.
* Point 2 represents the background colour of the splash screen icon.
* Point 3 represents the background colour of the splash screen.
* Point 4 represents the space for branding logo if needed.

Now, let's assign some values to the corresponding keys that describe the different pieces of the splash screen.

```xml

<style name="SplashActivity" parent="Theme.AppCompat.NoActionBar">

    <!-- Point 3-->
    <item name="android:windowSplashScreenBackground">#FFFFFF</item>

    <!-- Point 2-->
    <item name="android:windowSplashScreenIconBackgroundColor">#000000</item>

    <!-- Point 1-->
    <item name="android:windowSplashScreenAnimatedIcon">@drawable/ic_realm_logo_250</item>

    <!-- Point 4-->
    <item name="android:windowSplashScreenBrandingImage">@drawable/relam_horizontal</item>
</style>
```

> In case you want to use app icon( or don't have a separate icon) as `windowSplashScreenAnimatedIcon`, you ignore this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you want to use an app icon (or don't have a separate icon) as `windowSplashScreenAnimatedIcon`, you ignore this
```

parameter and by default, it will take your app icon.

> > Tips & Trick: In case your drawable icon is getting cropped on the Splash screen, then create an app icon from the image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Tips & Tricks: If your drawable icon is getting cropped on the splash screen, create an app icon from the image
```

> and then replace the content of `windowSplashScreenAnimatedIcon` drawable with the `ic_launcher_foreground.xml`.
>

> > For `windowSplashScreenBrandingImage`, I couldn't find any alternative. Do share in the comment if you find one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For `windowSplashScreenBrandingImage`, I couldn't find any alternative. Do share in the comments if you find one.
```

> ### Step 2: Add the theme to activity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Add the Theme to Activity
```

> Open AndroidManifest file and add a theme to the activity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open AndroidManifest file and add a theme to the activity.
```

``` xml
<activity
 android:theme="@style/SplashActivity">
</activity>
```

> In my view, there is no need for a new `activity` class for splash screen, which traditionally was required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my view, there is no need for a new `activity` class for the splash screen, which traditionally was required.
```

<br>

> <br>And now we are all set for the new Android 12 Splash Screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br>And now we are all set for the new Android 12 splash screen.
```

<img src="https://mongodb-devhub-cms.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/Screenshot_1632115543_4547ee45af.png" alt="drawing" width="200"/>

> Adding animation to the splash screen is also piece of cake, just update the icon drawable with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding animation to the splash screen is also a piece of cake. Just update the icon drawable with
```

`AnimationDrawable` and `AnimatedVectorDrawable` drawable and custom parameters for the duration of the animation.

```xml
<item name="android:windowSplashScreenAnimationDuration">1000</item>
```

> Earlier, I have also mentioned that the new API also helps with the initial app data download use case, so let see that in action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Earlier, I mentioned that the new API helps with the initial app data download use case, so let's see that in action.
```

In the splash screen activity, we can register for `addOnPreDrawListener` listener which will help to hold off the first
draw on the screen, until data is ready.

``` Kotlin
 private val viewModel: MainViewModel by viewModels()

 override fun onCreate(savedInstanceState: Bundle?) {
     super.onCreate(savedInstanceState)
     addInitialDataListener()
     loadAppView()
 }

 private fun addInitialDataListener() {
     val content: View = findViewById(android.R.id.content)
     // This would be called until true is not returned from the condition
     content.viewTreeObserver.addOnPreDrawListener {
         return@addOnPreDrawListener viewModel.isAppReady.value ?: false
     }
 }

 private fun loadAppView() {
     binding = ActivityMainBinding.inflate(layoutInflater)
     setContentView(binding.root)
```

### Summary

> I really like New `SplashScreen` API which is very clean and easy to use, getting rid of SplashScreen activity altogether. There are a few things I disliked, though

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I really like the new `SplashScreen` API, which is very clean and easy to use, getting rid of SplashScreen activity altogether. There are a few things I disliked, though.
```

> 1. Splash screen background support only single colour, waiting for support of vector drawable backgrounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The splash screen background supports only single colours. We're waiting for support of vector drawable backgrounds.
```

> 2. There is no design spec available for icon & branding image, which makes more of a hit & trial game, still couldn't fix the banding image in my example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. There is no design spec available for icon and branding images, which makes for more of a hit and trial game. I still couldn't fix the banding image, in my example.
```

3. Last but not least, SplashScreen UI side feature(`theme.xml`) is only supported from Android 12 and above, so we can't get rid of the old code for now.

> You can also check out the complete working example from my GitHub repo. Note: Just running code on the device would just show you white, to see the example close the app recent tray and then click on the app icon again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also check out the complete working example from my GitHub repo. Note: Just running code on the device will show you white. To see the example, close the app recent tray and then click on the app icon again.
```
